The man Gideon is
the Bible example we will consider.
But what is the challenge
this talk intends to address?
Are you ready for this?
Differences between fellow Christians.
You might think: ‘No, how can that be?
‘Jesus said the identifying mark
of his disciples
would be the “love among [themselves],”
not the differences.’
And that is true.
In our Christian brotherhood,
we feel the love.
Love is prominent.
It is dominant.
But as individuals,
we are drenched in imperfection.
Differences will inevitably erupt.
James 3:2 doesn’t mince any words.
It says: “We all [all] stumble many times.”
Not constantly, not every day
—but it acknowledges
that we make mistakes many times.
A brother or sister
may say something to hurt us.
Or maybe we push their emotional button
with words,
or they push ours.
Usually, it’s not intentional.
Often it’s a misunderstanding.
We or they say something in good faith.
One thinks it appropriate;
the other does not.
Or possibly what we said or did
was perceived in a way
that we could not even have imagined.
But it happened, and now we must
sow peace in order to reap peace.
And when we plant seeds,
some germinate much faster than others.
In the opening talk of this symposium,
it acknowledged that a farmer trusts
he will see results in due time.
If we find ourselves
at odds with a fellow Christian,
the Bible example of Gideon
can help us to sow and reap peace.
Now, Gideon was at war with the Midianites,
and he asked his fellow worshippers,
the Ephraimites,
to help chase them down
—Judges chapter 8.
They had tremendous success.
We say, “Great.”
But after the battle,
the Ephraimites were offended.
They tried to pick a fight with Gideon.
They felt that Gideon
did not call them into battle soon enough.
Judges 8:1:
“Then the men of Ephraim said to him:
‘What have you done to us?
“Why did you not call us when you went
to fight against Midian?’
And they quarreled bitterly with him.”
Well, these are all armed, fighting men.
If this difference of opinion
was allowed to escalate,
it could get out of hand very quickly.
In fact, in this case,
hand-to-hand combat might have ensued.
Instead, though,
how did Gideon sow peace with words?
Let’s read verses 2 and 3:
“He [Gideon] said to them:
“‘What have I done compared with you?
“‘Are not the gleanings of Ephraim
better than the grape harvest of Abiezer?
“‘It was into your hand that God
gave Midian’s princes Oreb and Zeeb,
“and what have I done compared with you?’
“[and notice]
When he spoke this way, they calmed down.”
Now, in this case,
the germination period was very short.
Gideon sowed peace with well-chosen words,
and he reaped peace in one conversation.
Now, in the following dramatization,
notice how a brother prevents the situation
from escalating into a confrontation.
And you know how Jehovah’s people are.
When there’s a need,
our brothers step up.
So even though we had
a lot of work to do back then,
we always had willing workers
—so many workers that some started to feel
like they were being overlooked.
Hey, Ray!
What’s up?
Hey, Matt,
I hear you’re organizing
the food distribution for our congregation.
Yeah, I’m trying my best.
Yeah, well, can I give you a hand?
My truck is all ready to go.
We actually just finished loading up
for the day, so I think we’re good.
But, wow, yeah,
thank you very much for offering.
OK.
When’s the next run?
You know what, Ray?
We’re about to pull out right now.
Is it OK if I call you back?
Yeah.
Yeah, sure.
Ray was such a hard worker,
more than most of us even realized.
He put his heart into every assignment.
Who was that?
But when I told him
we already had all the help we needed,
it didn’t go the way I hoped.
Ray, I think you’re muted.
So, what you’re saying is
you don’t think I’m qualified to help out.
No, no, we just—
We know how hard
you’re working caring for your mom.
We didn’t want to . . .
Isn’t Paul Thompson on your crew?
Yeah, but—
And Oliver Kagan?
Oliver’s my assistant, yes, but—
So how does this work, Matt?
I mean, you just use your friends,
and you shut the rest of us out.
Don’t you think I notice
how you brothers ignore me?
Ray, I owe you an apology.
I’m so sorry.
I should’ve spoken with you
about this right from the start.
You’re working so hard
taking care of your mom.
The last thing we wanted to do
was make things harder for you.
But even more than that,
we didn’t want to have to ask you
to do something
that would put you
or your mother at higher risk.
I know.
I worry about that too.
You know,
your mom
—we wouldn’t want anything to happen to her.
She’s one of our congregation treasures.
I know.
And you’re not so bad either.
Seriously, you’re such a good example.
Think how Jehovah must feel when he sees
all that you’re doing
for us and for your mom.
Thank you.
That means a lot to me.
If something comes up
that I can help with then
—even just a little—
and I can do it from home—
Well, that’s a good point.
Maybe I can get your thoughts
on something, if that’s OK?
Two good brothers
—but because of imperfection,
they were both looking
at the exact same situation
from two different perspectives.
Matt was well-intended
in what he did for Ray.
He realized he was caring
for his ailing mother;
he was trying to protect him.
But Ray was offended.
He even accused Matt of showing favoritism
to his friends and ignoring others.
Well, how did this calm down?
Well, first of all, thankfully,
Ray went directly to Matt
and expressed his feelings
between the two of them alone.
Well, how did that allow for a follow-up?
Well, Matt now had the opportunity
to absorb and understand Ray’s concerns.
What a blessing that was!
And so, what followed after that?
Well, you remember, when he grasped it,
Matt paused and apologized.
His words—like Gideon’s, well-spoken—
calmed Ray down.
It was a short germination period.
He sowed and reaped peace
in one conversation.
Well, how can we imitate Gideon
when there are future differences
with fellow worshippers?
Second Timothy 2:24
—(And you recall that when the men of Ephraim
confronted Gideon, they were confrontational.
They were upset;
they were rattling their sabers.)
but here, Paul, in effect,
summarizes for Christians Gideon’s demeanor.
Second Timothy 2:24:
“For a slave of the Lord
does not need to fight,
“[you see, with words or swords,
instead like Gideon, it says]
“but needs to be gentle toward all,
“qualified to teach, [and notice this]
showing restraint when wronged.”
That is not easy to do.
But “showing restraint when wronged”
is a means of sowing peace.
Now, if it’s just a minor offense,
we might ask ourselves,
‘Can I put up with this slight
to avoid a confrontation?’
But, of course, in the case with Ray,
he felt deeply hurt.
Matt realized the perspective was different.
But you remember, in hindsight,
Matt admitted,
‘I should have talked to you first.’
With those words, he planted seeds of peace.
Now, amazingly,
long before the first century,
Gideon manifested
what later became a Christian principle.
At Philippians 2:3, it says:
“With humility consider others
superior to you.”
Do you remember Gideon’s exact expression?
Twice he said:
“What have I done compared [to] you?”
His humility calmed
the Ephraimites down instantly.
So, what can we do?
Well, we can apologize
for our contribution to the difference,
even if the apology is done
on the other person’s terms.
We can pray for him.
We can give a sincere compliment;
do something kind for the person.
And if we have a discussion,
may our words be gracious
and the tone kindly.
Now, it would be nice if all the differences
between Christians
could have a short germination cycle.
But because of circumstances, personalities,
or the nature of the issue,
that’s not always possible.
But may we each
be determined to do our part to sow peace
and, like the farmer,
expect peace in due time.
And, oh,
how sweet restored peace truly is!
And now, Brother Robert Luccioni,
a helper to the Publishing Committee,
will give the next talk
of this symposium, entitled
“How They Sowed and Reaped Peace
—Abigail.”